Trinidad's jihadis: how tiny nation became Isis recruiting ground
Five years ago, Tariq Abdul Haqq was one of Trinidad and Tobago’s most promising young boxers, a Commonwealth Games medallist with Olympic dreams.
Now he lies dead somewhere in Iraq or Syria, buried in the ruins of the self-declared caliphate, along with dozens of his countrymen.
Together they formed one of the most unlikely, and most underreported groups of fighters drawn to Isis.
The tiny Caribbean nation, with a population of just 1.3 million, lies about 10,000km from the former Isis capital in Raqqa.
Yet at the bloody peak of the group’s power, Trinidad and Tobago had one of the highest recruitment rates in the world.
More than 100 of its citizens left to join Islamic State, including about 70 men who planned to fight and die.
They were joined by dozens of children and women, the latter including both willing and unwilling companions, security officials say.
By way of comparison: Canada and the US, with populations many times larger, are each thought to have produced fewer than 300 recruits who made the journey east.
The power of this story ?
the flight from a balmy Caribbean island state rich in oil and gas to the frontlines of a desert war ?
was not lost on the propagandists of Isis.
Advertisement

Their Dabiq magazine, aimed at potential recruits and sympathisers, featured a long interview with fighter Abu Sa’d al-Trinidadi ?
formerly Shane Crawford ?
in the summer of 2016.
He detailed his conversion, his trip to Syria and ended threatening death to Christians and bloodshed in the streets of his former home.
An unnerved Trinidad government raced to introduce new controls on travel and finance that would make the journey to any new jihadi project harder, and would track anyone attempting to return.
There has never been a terror attack on the islands, a plot uncovered, or even any formal Isis threat against Trinidad and Tobago.
But the country now faces the possibility that citizens trained by Isis could return to radicalise a younger generation ?
or that would-be recruits no longer able to make that dark pilgrimage will seek other targets for extremism.
The island has a thriving international oil and gas industry, and for the US there are potential worries about a more direct threat.
Trinidad’s citizens can travel through the Caribbean without visas, and a Trinidadian has already been jailed for his role in a 2007 plot to attack New York’s JFK airport.
Within a month of taking office, Donald Trump called Trinidad’s prime minister, Keith Rowley, to discuss terrorism.
The UK government has also recently warned of possible terrorist attacks in the country ?
although it issued similar travel warnings for countries including Spain and France.
Trinidad’s Muslims make up around one in 10 of the country’s population, and the overwhelming majority follow moderate forms of Islam.
But a tiny minority have been drawn to a more extreme creed.
In 1990 a group called Jamaat al Muslimeen launched the western hemisphere’s first and only Islamist coup attempt, taking the prime minister and legislators hostage for several days.
Eventually the army regained control, but the imam behind the coup, Yasin Abu Bakr, was released from jail within a couple of years under an amnesty deal and has resumed preaching.
“They want independence and an Islamic State, and they have the right to self-determination … so how can you say to these people that you cannot have an Islamic State because that is not an acceptable political status?
There is a Jewish State, there is a Catholic state.”

Bakr said he knew several of those who travelled to Syria.
Saying that he had to choose his words carefully when discussing their journeys, to avoid violating Trinidadian laws against supporting terrorism, he was still open in his admiration.
“They are not bad people, they are some of the most excellent people I knew, some of them,” he said.
“People from all walks of life, businessmen, who just decided this is the right thing to do.”

Then, in an extraordinary invocation of one of the greatest champions of non-violent resistance, he paraphrased lines from a 1963 speech by Martin Luther King Jr in tribute to the Trinidadians who signed up for Isis’s project of extreme violence.
“Martin Luther King said a man who is not willing to die for something is not really fit to live, and I respect someone who is willing to sacrifice themselves for the betterment of their fellow man, and that is what those individuals think they are doing.”
