Now, the Syria war shows few signs of ending and the refugees desperately need help.
Resettlement is needed now, because an organized, legal route to hope in the U.S., as well as in Canada and Australia, will disempower the smugglers who are currently charging 1,200 euros for desperate people to get the six kilometers from Turkey to Greece.
But resettlement of 100,000 refugees is important and for goodness sake, if Australia can take 18,000, if Canada can take 25,000, if France can take 35,000, then the United States, 10 times the size of Canada, can take 100,000 refugees.
We are talking about what is to be done with the very, very large numbers of Syrian refugees who do not have prior connections to the West, who are not who have no family, who are not connected to people here, and who lack the aptitudes and skills that would normally qualify them for the usual immigration processes.
We've when you hear these stories of actual terrorists who came in as actual refugees, and then we hear the president and his allies, who are pushing for this 100,000 Syrian refugees to be admitted and talk about the 18 to 24 month vetting period, which is really, you know, more of a waiting period than no one spends 18 to 24 months investigating refugees.
So, a couple of points I'd make. Number one. Yes, your government's job is to protect your security, job one. Believe me, people in the United States government do know that.
Number two. The question is how best to guarantee American security. Is it to have a coordinated policy or to have different hands working at cross purposes? Number three, no one in the United States government ever allows the United Nations to decide who comes in to the United States.
In the past decade, about 50 Somali Americans have traveled to Somalia to fight for Al Shabaab, a terror organization.
About 10 Somali Americans in the past two years have been charged with plotting to assist ISIS.
And one of the ideas that is important to keep in mind is that the problems of admitting a mismatched population tend to show up in the second generation, not the first.
Sure. Well, while we all worked for our respective State Departments, obviously, my esteemed opponents over there never worked behind a visa window, because people just lie to you all day long down there.
It's all about perception. It's Hollywood in an Islamic jihadi kind of way, and they play on that. It has nothing to do with facts.
Look, clearly ISIS is not having any trouble recruiting with or without Donald Trump.
They hate us, as some clever writer recently said, not because of what we do, because of who we are.
And they're not going to be any nicer to us if we accept even 500,000 refugees from Syria. That’s just a fact.